# IS/ICT 201: Personal Knowledge Management 

# Developing an Information and Knowledge Work Flow

Our work this semester had led us to these final weeks where we begin to put it
all together. Let's review for a bit.

In our first module, we studied search. In this module, we learned how to
search academic databases, and how to use thesauri, controlled vocabulary, and
Boolean logic to search within those databases. We also studied search engines.
We spent a lot of our time watching those Google videos and learning how to be
better at using Google to search, but we also covered DuckDuckGo as an
alternate, less ad intrusive search engine. We finished this module with
a discussion on evaluating and managing search results.

Becoming good information finders is only part of the solution to becoming
better at personal knowledge management. That is, once we become better at
search and have begun accumulating sources, we often need a way to better our
ability to save and organize those sources for later use---otherwise we simply
waste effort or repeat previous work. Thus, in our second module, we focused on
managing academic and non-academic sources, and it was in this module that we
learned about bibliographic reference managers and the use of tagging sources
to organize them.

In our third module, we visited specific kinds of sources (like census.gov and
American FactFinder, among others) from the general-interest to the specific.
The point of this module was to acquaint us with the specific kinds of
information sources that exist out there in the wild---these are sources that
are often hidden from search engines because the data they hold is buried. And
because the information is buried we often say that these sources are a part of
the deep web since they're not easy for search engines to use and access them.
The point is, that, if we do not become familiar with specific kinds of sources
out on the web and totally rely on search engines, then we'll only every
recover a portion of the information we may need when conducting thorough
information queries.

Our last module is dedicated to personalizing information and it addresses the
question: how do we take what we've searched for, and what we've saved and 
managed, etc., on the sites we may need that are buried in the deep web, and 
personalize that? How do we take notes on this process, how do we annotate 
those sources for ourselves and for a social world, how do we organize it?

It's these questions that I want you to think about in this second to the last
week of our class, and they all boil down to this question: how do we develop
an information and knowledge work flow---a work flow that begins with searching
databases and using search engines, to managing and organizing the sources that
we want to save, to visiting specific databases that exist outside those
well-worn areas that search engines rely too much on, and to taking notes on
and annotating those sources to save and share the ideas and thoughts we have
about them for later use?

Given this final question for the semester, we have two readings. One reading
is a simple *Lifehacker* article on the Trello web app. You do not have to
create an account on Trello, but I do want you to think about what this app
does and what it and others like it promises and enables (there are other,
similar information work flow apps out there, and feel free to look for them).

The second article, by Jones and others, is a bit more scholarly and focuses on
what the experts think are good and bad personal information practices and
tools. In this article, the authors used the Delphi Method to assemble a group
of experts together and figure out what the evidence says are the most
important and efficient information practices as well as the information
practices that are not good or helpful. I'm going to leave discussion about
this open and ask---what do you think of their results and findings? You'll
have to look closely at the results section of this article to discuss this.
