# IS/ICT 201: Personal Knowledge Management

## Browsing and Searching: Databases

Hi Class, welcome to the week where we begin to discuss browsing and searching
databases.

## Readings

This week we have one reading: Chapter 10 from our book by Cheryl Knott. 

In addition to this lecture, I'll post a short demonstration video about how to
apply some of what we learn here to online database search.

## Systematic Browsing

We all browse---online, in stores, as we page through books, and so on---but
when it comes to searching, browsing can become a highly useful tool when
applied systematically and strategically. The result is not simply a way to
surf the web or scan through some search results. Rather, the result of
intentional browsing---reading or skimming a list of titles and abstracts---can
be the accumulation of highly relevant source material---relevant to our
information needs and queries.

Browsing becomes even more powerful when we take advantage of the lists that
various databases provide. We've already discussed some of these lists in the
previous week (like thesauri)---today we'll look into how to use these lists to
aid our browsing.

## Browsing Strategies

Although we make a distinction between browsing and searching, it is oftentimes
helpful to begin a browsing session with a keyword search, and then use
something from the search results, something like an author's name or subject
term, to begin building a collection of documents that will satisfy our
information needs. 

We call this type of browsing *pearl growing* because each of the individual
documents that we collect are like pieces of sand, and as we accumulate these
pieces, we turn them into a pearl. This is a helpful metaphor---it's not simply
the individual, but useful, documents that we're interested in having---it's
the entire collection of documents we can curate and build that becomes the
pearl.

## Pearl Growing: Subject Browsing

In this slide, you see a screen shot of the [ERIC Database][1]. ERIC stands for
**Education Resources Information Center**. It's an online digital library or
database that's provided by the U.S. Department of Education and is an important
access point for millions of bibliographic records to journal articles, books,
research reports, white papers, government and other organizational reports, and
more.

ERIC, like other databases, offers a thesaurus of controlled terms to help aid
in information retrieval. For example, let's say I'm interested in research on
academic libraries. In this screen shot, I'm looking at the page that describes
the thesaurus **descriptor** for **academic libraries**, and as is usual with
thesauri, it not only describes how the term is defined in the database, but it
also links to related terms, including terms that are broader than academic
libraries, narrower than academic libraries, or to terms that are related to
academic libraries. I can click on any of these terms, and then click on the
link that says to **Search collection using this descriptor**. And in doing so,
I engage in subject browsing.

## Pearl Growing: Author Browsing

I can certainly browse using other access points, like author names. Here's
a small screen shot from ERIC of authors who have written on the topic of
academic libraries. Knowing that authors tend to write and research on
a limited range of topics (i.e., are specialists) is helpful---it allows me
browse by author and subject topic.

## Pearl Growing: Citation Browsing

There are only a handful of databases that are true citation databases. Three
useful ones available to use are [Scopus][2], [Web of Science][3] and [Google
Scholar][4]. The first two are available via UK Libraries (links in this
transcript) and the latter is available freely on the web. A citation database
is a database that shows you who has cited an article and provides a link to
all those articles that have cited an article. Citation theory says that when
two any two articles (or books, or other documents) are cited in this way, they
are more likely to be about the same thing. In fact, this is how Google
works---Google's original Page Rank Algorithm posited that if a web page links
to another web page, then the two pages pages are likely to be about the same
topic. Because of this theory, we can follow citations to find more relevant
articles.

Pictured here is a paper on information literacy. To the far right you can see
that it's been cited 97 times. If we click on that 97, we can begin to browse
those 97 articles or documents that cited this. It's highly probable that all
97 of those citing documents are also about information literacy---and thus,
browsing them would be of considerable help in if we were interested in reading
more about information literacy.

## Pearl Growing: Citation Browsing

Here's a screen shot of how *Google Scholar* employs citation browsing. Instead
of *Times Cited*, it says *Cited by*. If we click on that link, we'll be taken
to a page that begins to list the articles and documents that cited this
article, and like the *Web of Science* example, it's likely that some of the
citing articles will be relevant in our search on this topic.

## Pearl Growing: Combination Browsing

Like with most other searches, we can combine terms and use those combinations
to help focus our browsing sessions. The available combinations are dependent on
the databases we use. Here's a screen shot of an item from the ERIC database
along with the search term I used. The search term indicates that I'm interested
in sources about academic libraries that include the term 'regression' in the
abstract. If it contains regression in the abstract, then the source likely
used a statistical technique called linear regression, logistic regression, or
some other type of regression. Once I have this initial query, I can begin
browsing the 32 titles and abstracts that are listed in the results.

## Pearl Growing: Boolean Logic

All searches are Boolean searches because all searches in some way assume that
we mean a Boolean AND. E.g., if we search for 'cats dogs', Google will assume
we mean 'cats AND dogs', and so forth. But there are times when we'll want to
get specific with Boolean. In this screenshot, I started off in ERIC with
a search for 'academic libraries' as a descriptor. The first item in this
search happens to be an article by me (okay, I may have played with the search
to make this happen :). I can see that it has a descriptor called 'library
automation' next to it. Say I don't want any articles about library automation
in my results. I can add a minus sign to this and re-initiate my query to
remove all those sources. This is an example of the Boolean NOT, and we can see
that it resulted in around 1300 fewer results.

## How to Browse

When we browse, therefore, we are attempting to locate key qualities from our
results or our initial lists (e.g., authors, subjects, etc.). These lists
include the titles, the abstracts, the thesauri, and so forth. And these key
terms will help capture what our search is **about**.

## Developing a List

Many databases will offer a way to create, save, and export lists or individual
records based on browsing and searching. This helps us easily manage the
documents that we highlight as initially important and curate this list as it
grows and our search becomes more focused. I'll demonstrate this in a separate
video and we'll get more into managing personal information and knowledge in a
future module.

## Conclusion

- In this end, don't simply browse absentmindedly -- rather, browse with smarts:
  systematically and strategically. 
- Pearl browsing is an overall method for beginning with a known and important
  characteristic and then expanding on that.
- We can use pearl browsing based on a number of characteristics.
- We can combine pearl browsing methods with Boolean logic.
- We can use databases to save results -- and thus curate lists.

Stay tuned for an additional video to show some of this in action.

[1]:https://eric.ed.gov/
[2]:https://libraries.uky.edu/record.php?lir_id=3347
[3]:https://libraries.uky.edu/record.php?lir_id=467
[4]:https://scholar.google.com/
