# IS/ICT 201: Personal Knowledge Management

## Information Search: Databases

Hi Class, welcome to the week where we begin to discuss databases and searching
in a bit more detail.

## Readings

This week we have four readings---two from our book and two additional online
articles. The readings from the book detail some search strategies. The two
online readings discuss two major online sources, the [Internet Archive][1] and
the [Digital Public Library of America][2].

In addition to this lecture, I'll post a short demonstration video about how to
apply some of what we learn here to online database search.

## "Make It Work for You," Ch. 7, Knott

In the first forum, many of you will have found some interesting but specific
subject databases when you searched UK Libraries' website. If you know what you
want (and what area to search), these are good databases to begin a search
with. However, certainty is not always a privilege we have. For example, we may
not be fully familiar with a database and what it has to offer. Or we may not
know exactly what terms to use when we begin a search because, among other
reasons, we may not be really sure what we're looking for in a database or for
a particular homework assignment ("what will I write about??"). Thus, starting
a search with a general database, like *EBSCOhost's* **Academic Search
Complete**, can be helpful. It can help orient us to the kind of articles and
other works that we really need.

## Academic Search Complete (ASC)

The many databases provided by companies like *EBSCOhost*, *ProQuest*, or
*Gale* generally all look alike, but don't be fooled by this. Each of these
vendors provides multiple databases---some that are general search databases
and some that are focused on specific topics. Even if they look alike, they
will search different sets of sources.

On the right side of this slide, you see a screenshot of **Academic Search
Complete**. If you click on the **Publications** link at the top of that page,
it'll take you to a new page full of a long list of sources that **ASC** can
search.

## Newspaper Source

And then, here is another *EBSCOhost* database, but this, called **Newspaper
Source**, only searches newspapers. It looks almost the same as **ASC**, but
the two do not overlap much. To illustrate that:

## Academic Search Complete (ASC): Search example

Here is a search for the term 'google' in **ASC**. Our basic keyword search
results in over 36 thousand links to sources located in newspapers, magazines,
academic journals, and more.

## Newspaper Source: Search example

But in **Newspaper Source**, our same basic keyword search for the term 'google'
results in over 53 thousand articles only from newspapers. Not only are the
results different, but the number of sources vary also, and instead of being
able to filter by source type (since there is only one type of source:
newspapers), here can refine by Publication Title (as well as other facets not
shown here).

Note: I took these screen shots a year ago, and the results counts will be
different if you try to replicate this.

## ASC: Keywords versus Controlled Vocabulary

When we search general or specific databases, we often begin with the keywords
that come to mind---those keywords we think closely match the topic we're
interested in exploring. But there comes a point in our migration from the
general to the specific where we not only want to explore specific, topical
databases, but we also want to use specific terms. Controlled vocabulary offers
this ability to us. These are terms that have been identified as being about
some topic, and we use them to retrieve sources that have specifically been
tagged or categorized with those terms.

Let's say, for example, that I'm interested in reading about search itself. If I
use **Academic Search Complete's** controlled vocabulary, I have a variety of
options available to me, and will select one or more depending on the subtle
difference each of these controlled term provides.

On the left, we see variations among terms about search. These range from
**Searching behavior** to **Searching, keyword**, and using them as our search
terms offers more control than just searching using the term **search**.

On the right is listed a bunch of synonyms that we can use for our cell phones.
These terms were not taken from *EBSCOhost*, but from a thesaurus, and they
demonstrate just some of the variations in terminology, and thus complications,
that we have to think about when we search. Because if we over select just one
of these, it means we're possibly excluding a bunch of other sources that may
be relevant because, for example, their popularity and use changes over time,
and this will be reflected in the literature that you search.

## ASC: Controlled Vocabulary

I'll demonstrate how to take advantage of controlled vocabulary in a second
video, but here's an example from *EBSCOhost's* **ASC**. To access this
vocabulary, we click on the **Subject Terms** link at the top of the page, and
then look for a specific controlled term. If you find an interesting term and
use it, you'll retrieve all sources (e.g., all journal articles) that have been
categorized as being about that term.

## ASC: Boolean Searching

I'll also demonstrate Boolean searching in the separate video, and we'll learn
more about this type of search tactic in our lessons on Google, but Boolean
searching allows us to use three specific system terms to help us select or
exclude search results: AND, OR, NOT.

In the screen shot on the right, I'm using Boolean searching in combination
with controlled vocabularies, but we could also use Boolean searching using our
own keywords, too. The syntax for this kind of search looks complicated, but
the bottom of the screen shows a search builder, which can help facilitate the
process.

## Boolean Search

Here's a quick explanation of how Boolean search works. Note that different
databases systems employ this differently---some use these specific keywords to
indicate Boolean terms, but others may use other symbols, such as minus signs
for the Boolean NOT. Despite these differences, they all do the same thing. The
Boolean:

**AND**: if I search for 'cats AND dogs', using the term **AND** in my search,
my search results should include only those sources that contain **both** terms.

**OR**: if I search for 'cats OR dogs', using the term **OR** in my search, my
search results expand (grow) to include more results, including any source that
includes only the term 'cats', only the term 'dogs', or both terms.

**NOT**: if I search for 'cats NOT dogs', using the term **NOT** in my search,
my search results should include only those documents or sources that include
the term 'cats' and specifically do not include the term 'dogs'. In this sense,
the Boolean **NOT** limits my results.

## Boolean Searches And, Or, Not

Here's a graphical representation of Boolean search using Venn diagrams (by the
way, feel free to visit the site in the URL at the bottom of this slide, it
contains some nice tips).

## Not Just EBSCOhost

Other databases work similarly. Remember *ProQuest*? It has its general
database and then its specific ones, and it also offers controlled vocabulary
(they call them thesauri), and Boolean searching. 

## ProQuest's Thesauri

Here's a list of the different thesauri employed by *ProQuest*. *EBSCOhost*
also uses different sets of controlled vocabulary, but they tie specific
controlled vocabularies to specific databases. *ProQuest* makes all of their
thesauri available regardless of the specific database. This can be useful and
also shows a difference between the two main vendors.

## Not necessarily for everyday

You won't need these tools everyday, but they should be a part of your toolbox,
so that when you do have a demanding information need that requires a thorough
search of the documentation and the literature, you'll have them available to
you. That is, these tools are precision instruments, and having a command of
them will provide you a valuable skill set.

## E-journals

And then, if you want to get specific, you can search for specific e-journals
(journals that are online if not also in print). Many journals are titled
topically---that is, their titles are descriptive of their contents and their
areas of interest, and so searching them using keywords can be helpful in
identifying important journals in your area of study.

## "The Elements of Search," Ch. 8, Knott

We've briefly covered the elements of the search interface in the previous
slides. Chapter 8 extends upon these and adds an additional element: **You**.

These precision instruments require a little work---you have to get to know
them, how they work, what they search, and so forth, and you have to devise
ways, given the background knowledge and information you already possess, to
leverage the most out of them.

Plus, you won't need all of them all the time, but knowing a few of the
important topical databases that you have available to you is forever helpful.

Remember also, all databases have help pages that demonstrate how to get the
most of their databases (and thus, help you not waste your time, which is
valuable, right?). So get to know those help pages. [Even Google has one][3].

## The Help Pages

Here's a screen shot of the menu that leads to *ProQuest's* help page. Get to
know these!

## Demonstration Video

I'll provide an extra video that helps put this all into some perspective and
practice.

## Can the Internet be Archived?

For some of our lectures, we'll talk not just search and sources from our book
readings, but I'll also highlight some other sources that are on the web and
that you should know about. Today, I want to highlight web archiving and a
couple of digital libraries.

How many times have you clicked on a link only to find that it no longer works?
Your experience with this problem may vary, but it is a growing problem on the
web. We rely on documentation and evidence to support the claims that we make.
In fact, all of science, scholarship, and technology depends on our ability to
link documents together, either through the footnote or the citation or the
link. Link rot threatens our ability to progress and advance. The [Internet
Archive][4] helps address this problem by capturing versions of web pages as
they existed at certain points in time, but as the article on the **IA**
indicates, no archiving service can be comprehensive. The Web is too big and
some things will not be captured or will be lost even after they're captured.

## time travel -- Memento

[time travel][5], like the [Internet Archive's Wayback Machine][6], provides an
interface for accessing archived versions of the web. Check both sites out at
the links in this slide or in the transcript for this lecture. They're not only
super cool, but super helpful too. At the right is a screen shot from the
**Wayback Machine** of *Amazon.com* as it looked on October 13, 1999.

## Digital Public Library of America

In addition to archiving past versions of the web, digital libraries offer an
additional way to explore all that's available but difficult to find via
a simple Google search. The [DPLA][7] specifically attempts to link together
digital collections across the U.S. In doing so, it provides access to millions
of items---photos, sound files, text documents, and more. If you create an
account, totally free, like a public library, you can build your own
collections. If you're technologically oriented, you can also use the **DPLA**
and its database to build apps---whether for the desktop or the smartphone.

## europeana

[europeana][8] is Europe's counterpart to the U.S.'s **DPLA**, and is also as
beautiful and as awesome. You can use **europeana** to locate images of artwork,
artefacts, books, videos, audio, and more. Check it out.

## In Conclusion

* Search strategy: when starting off, it's sometimes best to begin with the
  general and then migrate to the specific. This is true not just for databases
  but also for terms, and it works just as well in these databases as it does
  with Google.
* Use controlled vocabularies, if offered, by the database, to help you control
  your own search.
* Use Boolean searching
* Get even more specific with e-journal searches
* Read the help pages for any specific database. Knowing how to use a specific
  database will save you time.
* Visit sources such as the **Internet Archive**, the **DPLA**, **europeana**,
  and others for access to rich collections, archive or current

[1]:https://archive.org/
[2]:https://dp.la/
[3]:https://support.google.com/websearch/?hl=en#topic=3081620
[4]:https://archive.org/
[5]:http://timetravel.mementoweb.org/
[6]:https://web.archive.org/
[7]:https://dp.la
[8]:https://www.europeana.eu/portal/en
